The Project Gutenberg EBook of History of the Second Massachusetts
Regiment of Infantry: A prisoner's diary, by Samuel M. Quincy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: History of the Second Massachusetts Regiment of Infantry: A prisoner's diary
       A paper read at the officers' reunion in Boston, May 11, 1877

Author: Samuel M. Quincy

Release Date: January 9, 2011 [EBook #34895]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 2ND MASS. REG. PRISONER'S DIARY ***




Produced by Sam W. and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)









                       HISTORY
                       OF THE
      SECOND MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT OF INFANTRY.


                 A PRISONER'S DIARY.

   A PAPER READ AT THE OFFICERS' REUNION IN BOSTON,
                    MAY 11, 1877,

                          BY

                  SAMUEL M. QUINCY,

  CAPTAIN SECOND MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT OF INFANTRY.
         BREVET BRIGADIER GENERAL VOLUNTEERS.


                       BOSTON:
    George H. Ellis, Printer, 141 Franklin Street.
                        1882.



        PRIVATELY PRINTED FOR THE ASSOCIATION.




A PRISONER'S DIARY.


The committee's announcement, that on this evening there would be read
by me a paper relating to the history of the regiment, I fear may have
awakened false expectations. But it was suggested that a little
personal history of my own experiences, from the moment when that
terrific flank fire caused the regiment to leave me for dead on the
field of Cedar Mountain to the moment when, three months later, I
again came under the stars and stripes at Aiken's Landing, would
interest former comrades for a short time to-night. It is safe to say,
perhaps, that our regiment passed through every possible experience of
the war. In all the various scenes of suffering and endurance, both
physical and mental, which the war could offer, the Second
Massachusetts was represented; and in that view, perhaps, the personal
adventures of those who, while separated from the corps, always
considered its membership the highest of honors, may be considered as
forming part of the general history of the regiment itself.

I was fortunate enough to find in my blouse pocket, after acute
physical suffering had in a measure given place to the prisoner's
worst enemy, the leaden vacuity of ennui, a little duodecimo almanac
and diary for 1862, with half a lead pencil. With these, by dint of
fine writing, I succeeded in keeping a sort of journal of daily
events, with my reflections thereupon, during the whole period of my
captivity, the last entry being comprised in the words, "_A free man
at Willard's_." From this journal, I shall make copious extracts,
believing that words then written will reproduce the situation better
than any subsequent description from memory.

At about 2 P.M. on the 8th of August, the long roll was beaten in the
camp of the Second Massachusetts, at Little Washington. As has often
happened, we fell in only to fall out again with the news that it only
meant get ready to march; and in fact it was nearly five before we
were off. The heat during the first hour or two of the march was
severe, but the latter part was by moonlight and very pleasant. Still,
I find it recorded that some unfortunate and unseasoned recruits, who
had just joined us from home with knapsacks heavy with five times what
they really needed, were utterly played out before the sun was down.
And here I take up the narration as I find it in the little book
referred to, with an occasional interpolation and explanation which
will be marked as such in brackets.

_August 14, 1862._--One week to-day since the fight. Let us attempt a
_resume_. On arriving at Culpeper, Friday night, after a moonlight
march which about played out the unfortunate recruits with their heavy
knapsacks, we lay down in a field, Stephen and I cracking my provision
box, which had come on with the blankets. [This was Lieutenant Stephen
Perkins of Company A with whom I had become intimate, and who shared
with me a great and innocent passion for tea. Whichever of us was
known to possess a supply of the article was sure of a visit from the
other at his camp fire after a march. Before separating that night, I
remember he said to me, "Sam, we shall see more fighting soon: I feel
it; there is a battle in the air." There was, indeed, and it ended the
battle of life for him.] We then slept on the moor, to the sound of
freshly arriving troops and wagons. In the morning, we find an army
around us. After a breakfast at the sound of the triangle [for by this
unmilitary instrument did Johnson, our caterer, call the officers'
mess to meals], under the sun, we fall in and take arms, but have
hardly done so when we stack them again and proceed to stake out
ground for a camp. But this is just done and tents beginning to rise
when Sherman, of Pope's staff, rushes by to head-quarters at a rate
which "spared not for spoiling of his steed," and which caused us to
hold our hands in expectation for a moment; and, sure enough, in two
minutes we were again in line, and this time off under a blazing sun,
though for once without our knapsacks. Through Culpeper and about six
or seven miles further in a fiery furnace hotter even than that of
Shadrach & Co. Near the front, heard a little firing. Sergeant Parsons
fell with sun-stroke. Left two recruits with him and pushed on for the
right, where at last, panting and half dead, we got into a wood where
we stacked arms and fell down behind them. The half hour of breeze and
shade which ensued made men of us once more, so that when my company
was ordered to skirmish we were actually able to do it. The firing of
artillery commenced at about 3 P.M., as I should judge, pretty heavy
and well-sustained. Ned Abbott's company and mine were ordered to
report forward, and deployed our skirmishers on the garden fence, with
reserves behind; and there, for a couple of hours, we watched the
swayings of the artillery fight, timing the explosion of the heavy
shells, and watching the varying intervals between the shots of the
rebel batteries. At last, as the sun seemed not more than an hour
high, and just as Ned Abbott, lying by my side in the rear of our
skirmishers, had expressed his disbelief in the fight's coming off
that afternoon, an orderly, followed by Pitman of Banks' staff, came
up to where Gordon was sitting on his horse near us, watching the
field through his glass; and it seemed, for the first time, that
something was going wrong. I was near enough to hear that he wanted a
regiment of Gordon's brigade to report, as I understood it, to Banks
at the centre. "You must take him your regiment, then," said Gordon to
Colonel Andrews. Abbott and I jumped to our feet, and were ordered to
rally our men on the battalion; and hardly, panting and breathless,
had we resumed our places in line when the regiment advanced by the
right of companies to the front, until we had cleared the garden, and
then by company into line.

Then commenced the furious and incessant roll and crash of musketry,
leaving, as Copeland expressed it, no interval in which a single other
shot could have been inserted. We plunged over the ditch and crashed
through a wood, out of which came Crane of the Third Wisconsin,
covered with blood, and reeling in his saddle, until after about a
quarter of a mile we came to a fence with a wheat-field beyond. In
this, a brigade of rebels were in line, but what they were firing at
we couldn't see. We opened fire and then were ordered to cease--why, I
don't know, as I could see no one between us and them. But, as their
line advanced, we soon re-opened fire, as the converging storm of
balls hailed upon us.

How long this lasted, I could not tell. Their red flags advanced, but
large gaps were opening in their lines. Finally, the bullets seemed to
come from all sides at once. Pattison, my lieutenant, shouted in my
ear that Cary was down, and he had been ordered to take his company;
and he left. Then the red flags seemed close upon the fence, and it
seemed to me that the right had fallen back; and I started across the
little gap in the fence to see. Yes, the right had gone; but in that
instant I caught it, first in the right leg, then through the left
foot, and in that same instant the enemy were upon us, or rather upon
me, for what was left of my company had gone with the rest. Though
staggering, I had not yet fallen, when one rushed up, aimed at my head
with "Surrender, G--d d--n your soul!" which I did. But if I had known
then, what now I know, I would have lain there for dead till they were
gone, and then dragged myself slowly toward our side. [This refers to
the fact that one of the first pleasing pieces of information
communicated to me by my captors, who were surprised that I did not
already know it, was that, by special orders of Jeff. Davis, none of
Pope's officers were to be treated as prisoners of war or paroled, but
kept as hostages to be hanged from time to time in retaliation for
any such execution of guerrillas as was threatened in Pope's
celebrated orders, of which we then had not yet heard.]

But as it was [the journal resumes], I gave up my sword and pistol,
sat down, borrowed my captor's knife, ripped my trousers open and shoe
off, and examined damages. An awful hole in foot and little one in
leg, at the bottom of which the bullet was plainly visible. Seeing
this, the Confederate gentleman to whom I then belonged was seized
with a desire to perform a surgical operation with the knife referred
to, but yielded to my remonstrance and request that he would be
satisfied with having put it in, and allow some gentleman of the
medical staff to undertake the bullet's extraction. Two of them then
offered to take me across the wheat-field to where their own wounded
were, asking me at the same time what money I had for them. They did
not offer any violence or undertake to search me. Had they done so,
they would have made prize of my money-belt, containing over $90 in
greenbacks and a gold watch. I gave them some ten or twelve gold
dollars which I had in my pocket, reserving one by great good luck, as
will presently appear. Then they carried me across the field, with
each arm affectionately round a rebel neck. As I passed the fence
where the right had been, there lay poor Ned,--who half an hour before
had joked about being two hours in action without losing a man,--with
white, waxen face against the dead leaves. It was just light enough
for me to recognize him. Who else of the officers had fallen, I did
not know, save that Cary was down, as Pattison had told me, before our
lines gave way. With occasional halts, they carried me across the
field, and put me down among a groaning mass of wounded of both sides.
The men next me gave me water and a knapsack for my head, a man came
along with a canteen of whiskey and I got a drink. The moon rose full
over the trees, and the cannonade recommenced. I got a piece of the
wounded rebel's blanket next me over my shoulder, lay as near him as I
could; for, though the day had been blazing, the night mist and loss
of blood made me shiver; and I slept. Once I was waked by some one
attempting to pull off my seal ring; but he desisted when I pulled my
hand away, remarked, "A handsome ring," and went on. Very likely he
thought me dead, as my companion under the blanket was by that time.

Before daylight, the pain of my shattered bones brought me again to
consciousness. Somehow, I hated to see the sky begin to brighten,
knowing how soon the sun would blaze furiously down upon us. And yet I
didn't seem to realize the horrors of the position, but looked upon
myself as acting a part for which I had expected to be cast, and with
the stage business of which I was perfectly familiar; and all the
wounded took it more or less as a business matter. As the sun rose, I
gradually dragged myself under trees with the rest of the groaning
set, leaving those who had died to sleep it out. A rebel soldier
passed with two canteens on. "What will you sell me one of those
canteens for?" said I. "I'll give you a dollar." He laughed and was
passing on. "A gold dollar," said I. He stopped: "What, Yank! Have you
got a gold dollar?" "Yes," said I, "you go to the branch, fill the
canteen with fresh water, and here's the dollar." If he had been a
wretch, he might have taken it away and left me to die, for there was
no one else near except wounded; but, after considering a few minutes,
he went off to the stream, filled the canteen, brought it to me, took
the dollar, and left. And that canteen, I think, saved my life; for
soon the sun rose so that no more shade could be had. I tore up my
handkerchief, bound my wounds, and kept them moist, kept the canteen
under me and took little sips when my thirst became unbearable, and so
got through the day, making the water last until evening. By and by,
they began to pick up the wounded by threes and pairs, in ambulances.
When, however,--I should think about 3 P.M.,--there were about five or
six of us left, and I the only Yankee, a sudden rush of men through
the woods and stampede of wagons down the road, with an accompaniment
of "Yankees are coming!" swept every sound man away from us. Every
man that had legs used them at double quick. Then the prayers of the
wounded to the wagoners, as they flogged their teams past: "Oh, take
me away from here, help me into a wagon; for God's sake, don't leave
me to the Yankees!" One poor fellow, all of whose clothes had been
taken off by the surgeon engaged on his wounds, raised himself, stark
naked and covered with blood, against a tree, and implored every
teamster in turn to stop and take him in. The effect was grisly. It
struck me that, if they were really coming, some of the rebs then
rushing by might take occasion to settle one Yankee "_en passant_": so
I got my blouse off, covered myself with dead rebel sergeant's coat,
and lay low. A section of artillery extricated itself from the wagons,
and wheeled into battery; and, finding myself just in point-blank
range, I succeeded by painful endeavor in getting behind a big stump.

But, alas! the excitement subsided, the wagons were stopped and
ordered back, officers cursed the originators of the panic, and it was
all over. But a real charge or a few shots just then would have
started "secesh" with a rush, and saved the captain of Company E,
Second Massachusetts Volunteers. After awhile, an ambulance came and
picked up the last two of us and carried us to where the hospital
flies were pitched. My driver, after making sure that nobody heard
him, informed me that he had always been for the Union, and voted
against "secesh"; "and when they started this war," said he, "I swore
they'd have to fight it out without me; but I was wrong there, for
they've got me." He drove me up to a fly under which were some dozen
or twenty wounded on hospital cots. At first, they said there was no
room; but then somebody discovered that his neighbor was dead, and
suggested that the Yankee might take his place. So they moved the dead
man out under the eaves inside the guys, and gave me the cot. The
surgeon examined and bound up my foot, relieving me with the assurance
that it would probably stay on, though I should be always lame. The
bullet came out of my leg very easily, for, oddly enough, it hadn't
pierced my drawers, but had carried them deep into the leg in a sort
of bag. A thunder-storm now burst upon us, and with the first gust
down came our house, over living and dead. After a long staggering and
flapping, they got her set again. The rain thundered on the canvas and
cascaded in sheets over the dead man under the eaves, but he was
beyond even water cure. The scene was dismal: in the intervals of
rain, they took to burying legs and arms upon the hill, and it would
not have made a bad slide for a stereoscope, on the whole. But, as
night fell, I took my supper with some relish,--a piece of hard-tack
and ham, given me by a rebel private on the field,--and with the help
of the dead rebel's blanket of last night, which I had sense enough to
bag when they picked me up, I slept once more.

In the morning, they sent me in an ambulance or "avalanche," as they
call it, to head-quarters. Thought at first I was going before Felix
or Stonewall himself; turned out to be General Hill. He came and
looked into the ambulance. "What regiment?" "Second Massachusetts."
"Let's see, Gordon's old regiment?" "Yes." "Best regiment in Banks'
army; cut all to pieces, though: I've been over the ground," and exit.
He ordered me sent to Orange Court House; countermanded, and they
dumped me out by a blacksmith's shop. A surgeon came along and ordered
me sent to Rapidan Station, on the box seat of an "avalanche"; and an
awful "avalanche" it was,--four men with legs and arms off inside. It
was eight miles over rocks and through rivers, and generally such a
drive of damnation as never entered into the heart of man to conceive.
Luckily, I kept my strength; but why the inside passengers didn't die
before we got half way is the marvel. "The lamentable chorus, the cry
of agony, the endless groan," as we bounced and jolted over corduroy
road and river bed, was an ill thing to hear. We arrived at the
railroad about dusk, just as I was calculating about how much longer
I could stand it without fainting, and they put us out on the grass
among those already arrived. The train came along after dark, and,
finding that I must shift for myself or be left in the field, I made
my painful way on hands and knees, among horses' feet and under the
awful "avalanche," to the platform, where, after a while, they picked
me up and put me aboard; turned seat back, put my foot up, and slept.

An interval of broken oblivion in the dark car, with occasional
wakings to a semi-consciousness of rumbling wheels, brakes, and once
familiar railroad sounds, mingled strangely with groans, cries,
stench, squalor, and misery. But, as the night was only a succession
of frightful dreams, I didn't undertake to decide which was reality,
but took the benefit of the doubt, which was a species of relief. But
with the gray dawn illusions vanished, and the miserable reality stood
out, bald and unmistakable. Where we were going, I didn't know; but
after a while the impression seemed to prevail that it wasn't
Richmond, but Staunton; and at about twelve we arrived here. The train
at once became a menagerie, wherein the Yankee wild beasts were
stirred up and stared at by the town. One citizen, I remember, was
turned out of the car by a rebel sergeant for insulting the prisoners.
They took us out at last, one or two rebs who had died in the night
being first served. Finally, about evening, they took the two Yankee
captains, in almost an upside-down position, with heads in straw and
feet in air, through the town to the hospital, women coming to the
windows with various expressions of countenance, pity being the
scarcest. I've often seen them look out to see soldiers pass, but
never expected to figure in this sort of a pageant for their
edification.

[The reflections and moralizings on my situation, which follow, it was
my first impulse to omit from this paper entirely; but on the whole I
decide to let them stand as I find them, requesting only that comrades
will consider them as given in a sort of family confidence.]

Of my life, if life it may be called [continues the diary], in this
place, I desire to make no record, the _olim haec meminisse_ principle
having no application here. Let the waters of oblivion cover it
forever, if I am ever again a free man. To lie a crippled and helpless
butt for the exulting Philistine and his women ten thousand times
worse than himself, while such tremendous history is being made of
which we can only guess at the reality, is a living death. And with
such a companion! What is happening behind the impenetrable curtain
between us and the North? Until the news that God has abdicated and
Satan reigns is confirmed beyond a peradventure, so long will I
believe that the right will triumph in the end. But where the end may
be, this year or twenty hence, _quien sabe_?

Of my own chances for life and liberty, I cannot even guess. The
blackness of darkness surrounds me on every hand, with no perceptible
ray or glimmer from any quarter, as yet. But, doubtless, many a man
who thinks he sees his path of life stretching away in far perspective
is really as blind as I, and can discern no further beyond his nose.
When the tide of war shall turn, as turn it will, what will be done
with us? where shall I be,--here or in the Libby? Well, each place has
its merits: here, enough to eat and no bracelets; there, the company
of gentlemen. Oh Harry Russell! if you and I were together to cheer
each other with regimental chat, or gallant Major Jim, _sans peur et
sans reproche_, in your company I could suffer and be strong unto the
end. But I fear that, through desperate wounds, his mortal body has
had no longer strength to retain the soul of one of the bravest
Christian gentlemen that ever drew sword for the right since the world
began.

And Stephen, my friend, man of culture, reading, and intellect, whose
only complaint of camp life was the loss of time and opportunity for
the growth of mind,--that such lights should be forever extinguished
by the bullets of men so few degrees above the brute level, saddens
the soul. And shall all this have been in vain? Answer, freemen and
gentlemen of the North, with unborn generations waiting: to bless or
curse your memory,--answer now!

[The above allusion to "no bracelets" refers to the assertion of a
Richmond paper, immediately communicated to us by way of cheering our
spirits, that Pope's officers, on arriving at the Libby, had all been
handcuffed. But, although this proved to be erroneous, yet my own
boast of no bracelets in the hospital was somewhat premature, as the
following incident will show. One evening after supper, just as a
half-drunk rebel officer had become so abusive to us that I almost
expected the cowardice of a blow, entered the sergeant of the guard,
who put a stop to that fun, but, to our great disgust, after the
officer had gone, produced a pair of handcuffs, which he informed us
he was ordered to apply to "that Yankee," indicating Captain Bush of
the Twenty-eighth New York, who, being wounded in the arm, was walking
up and down the room, which no one else was able to do. (This officer,
by the way, had voluntarily accompanied his regiment into action,
armed with a cane, being under arrest and deprived of his sword.) His
wound was severe, and the surgeon had expressed doubts of saving the
arm. We all remonstrated against the barbarity of handcuffing the only
man whom it would really hurt. No use: he had got his orders, and on
went the irons. Bush didn't say a word, but, after the sergeant had
gone, with a sharp stick which his neighbor whittled out for him, and
a piece of string poked into the lock of the handcuff, succeeding in
pulling back the catch, and slipped one wrist out. The other, he
didn't mind. Before the ward surgeon came round the next morning, he
slipped it in again. The surgeon was indignant,--not at the barbarity,
but at the interference with his case,--and off he rushed to the
surgeon in command, to have the handcuffs removed. But all he obtained
was an order that Bush be sent to Richmond, handcuffs and all. We
heard, however, that the ward surgeon had them removed as soon as Bush
was clear of the hospital yard.

The story we heard, probably true, was that Hay, the medical director
in command, reading the account of the Richmond handcuffing, one night
when he was tight, was fired with the idea of emulating such a noble
example, and ordered the bracelets to be applied at once to any Yankee
who was well enough to be walking about. Even our visitors were rather
ashamed of this performance, and invented an absurd story that Bush
had tried to escape,--a man with a shattered arm trying to escape from
the only chance of saving it!]

[Journal resumed.] It seems that an opportunity may turn up for
sending this little book off to the North by a man who will shortly
get his parole, and I think will undertake to smuggle it through.
These jottings have been almost my only resource to pass away the
leaden hours. With no companion to whom I can open my soul, I must
soliloquize, if only to convince myself that I have not yet sunk to
the level of my surroundings.

_Saturday, September 20._--Six weeks to-day since the fight in which
we became dead to the world. "Hope springs eternal," etc. If it
didn't, how many would turn their faces to the wall! One man got his
everlasting furlough the other day, just at supper time; but they
pulled the sheet over his face and went on with the bread and
molasses; and, when that was over, down he went to the dead-house.

This, in my opinion, is for the country the very moment of convulsion
and travail, out of which some new state of things,--the commencement
of some new era,--for better or for worse, will surely come. "When the
pain is sorest, the child is born; and the night is darkest before the
dawn of the day of the Lord at hand." But at this critical moment to
be walled up alive, where only faint echoes and uncertain sounds from
the great fields reach us,--the fields where our fellow-soldiers are
playing out the great game of the age is,--a chance of war, and
nothing to complain of while we still live. A great battle has been in
Maryland, and, although they make it out that we were worsted, yet
from signs and tokens we draw our own inferences. First and greatest,
the women haven't been up to crow victory over the Yankee prisoners,
_ergo_ the first despatch did not announce a success; the doctors have
said nothing, and last night Dr. Hay, with a dozen others and all the
dressers that could be spared, left for Maryland. Charley, the nigger,
yesterday reported that the folks in town felt very bad about it.
Reports fly about of fifty thousand killed and wounded on both sides;
and, as they can't know ours, theirs must have been tremendous to have
started such reports. (Here come the women to the menagerie.) At all
events, it's such a victory as they can't stand a repetition of; and
now, if the North will pour in reinforcements, there may be a glimmer
of daylight for the cause, if not for me.

A man has come into this room, wounded at Port Republic, First
Sergeant Seventh Ohio, the most awful specimen of emaciation that I
ever saw or would have believed consistent with the vital spark. The
articulation of each joint, covered only by the tense polished skin,
is as distinct as in a skeleton.

Another horror: a rebel deserter, who was put in with the Yankees in
order to be under guard, has just been sheared, on account of one of
the plagues of Egypt; and his head was a sight to dream of, not to
tell. He had been living in the woods since he deserted, was
immediately taken down with typhoid fever, and I thought wanted to
die.

The room now consists as follows, beginning with my next neighbor:
Corporal James Shipp, known as Jimmy, the pet of the room, doctors and
nurses inclusive: a nice, simple-hearted boy of seventeen, brave and
good; shot in shoulder, scapula taken out; recovering. Private Smith,
Forty-sixth Pennsylvania: good fellow, apparently; has taken laudanum
enough to float a ship, and seems to be getting fat on it.

The skeleton sergeant comes next. He keeps a journal, and his wound
drives me from the room, whenever opened.

The deserter and company. He wouldn't have needed John Phoenix's
tape-worm, in order to use the editorial "we."

A bragging squirt of a Georgian, who got scratched in the finger in
Maryland, and marched all the way here to save his precious hide and
boast of the Yankees he had killed.

George Peet, Fifth Ohio: a good young fellow; lost his foot the other
day, after six weeks trying to save it.

Henry Shaw, One Hundred and Second New York: a little, white-headed
Harlemite, a little conceited; talks a little better English than the
rest of them; shot in back; recovering.

Arthur Jordan, Tenth Maine: obliging, pleasant, nice fellow; had the
measles, and was sent to the "measly ward," from which he has just
made his escape on his own hook, returning here at the risk of being
put in the guard-house.

Sergeant Henry Holloway, Fifth Connecticut: the only one with whom I
can fraternize at all; a railroad man, engine driver, etc., infected
with the insubordinate ideas natural to his regiment; otherwise, a
good fellow.

Captain ----, ---- ----, selfishness incarnate. It takes all sorts of
men to make up a world, but let us hope that it takes few such as he.

_Thursday, September 25._--Great news in yesterday's paper. It seems
Pope's officers have been paroled. That is a glimmer of daylight, and
looks as if the winter might not be passed in shop ward No. 7, or the
Libby. General Prince is courteously alluded to as "the ringleader of
the gang." For pure malignity of venom, these Richmond editors would
beat even the witches' toad that was stewed after his month's nap
under the stone.

_Sunday, 28th._--Away with visions of home and ease! Wilder Dwight has
been killed, and I am Major, I suppose.... Now to play the man and be
prepared to go to the majority in either sense, when God's will is.

Just had a visit from Joshua Munroe,--and a cheering visit, indeed,--a
descendant of Israel Munroe of Lexington fight, and here an Israelite
among the Philistines. Rebel soldier, just leaving for his regiment,
shakes hands all round with our men, who enjoin him to take care of
himself. And how soon these men may be putting daylight through each
other! Note: I have experienced from rebel privates almost uniform
kindness, good-fellowship, _camaraderie_; they treat one as
fellow-soldier. And as for our men, they fraternize as though the
strawberry mark of brotherhood was on every arm. All the insult, all
the bitterness and ill-treatment, have come from officers and citizens
of high position in society, and from the women, whose envenomed
tongues are let loose upon the wounded prisoner without mercy. This
space [referring to the space in the diary under the printed date of
Saturday, May 24] is the date of our midnight fight on the dark road;
and this [Sunday 25] of our fight and flight to the Potomac, when hell
broke loose in Winchester town; and this Sunday is just such another,
cool and bright; and this morning [Monday, May 26] A, B, E, and K,
were left on picket at the fence and in woods, with a section of
Cothran, under Lieutenant Peabody. That was the work that tried our
souls. Ned and Dick, brave fellows, both gone before. "We a little
longer wait, but how little who can know!"

Two men have died on this floor within the last twelve hours,--the old
man Carter with the consumption, and the lieutenant with the typhoid,
the former last night and the latter just now. This afternoon
[Wednesday, May 28], we crossed the river; and how good camp was!

_Monday, October 6._--Got letters from home last night, through Jim
Savage, who still lives,--God be praised!--though with one leg off,
and a shattered shoulder. Add to that that we are promised the parole
of the yard; add to that orders expected for Richmond in a few days.
I'll bet my knapsack will be packed when the assembly beats. However,
we'll not count this chicken before he chips the shell, as
old ---- has tried to addle the egg all he could.

_Tuesday, October 7._--One chicken incubated and made his appearance.
Hay, yesterday afternoon, in the intervals of carving below (the
hospital operating room was immediately beneath us), sends up word
that, if we will write out our parole of the yard, he will sign it.
And old ---- not being on hand to botch the thing, I cooked up a
document, got it signed and sent down, to which the illustrious chief
then affixed his sign-manual, and we are henceforward free of yard and
grounds. Bully for that! [I remember now, I was the first to test the
document's efficacy, for we could hardly believe that it would really
pass us out. The guard stopped me, of course, called the corporal, and
finally decided that it was a genuine thing; and I hobbled painfully
down four steep flights and out,--looked up and saw the rest all
crowding to the window and waving hands and hats to see me actually
emerge, like a rat, from the trap which had held us through long weary
months.] I find that the art of crutch progression is quite a science,
and has its outside edges and its backward rolls, etc., which are not
to be learned without much practice and balancing. Up and down stairs
with ease, confidence, and grace, is somewhat of an attainment.

_Thursday, 9th._--Struggled out to pond and washed; first decent wash
for three months. Had to steal a piece of black soap, and push out a
board over the mud,--hard work for a cripple. Stopped in at
carpenter's shop and saw Dr. Hay slice an arm off, _secundum artem_.

_October 13._--Suffering with the first cold snap. The sergeant's
wound keeps every window open, and we might as well or better be _sub
Jove frigido_. Rumors of small-pox pervade the air.

_Tuesday, 14th._--An alarm of small-pox yesterday afternoon in our
ward turned out false, I believe, but has scared everybody most out of
their wits. It seems, however, there were cases elsewhere; for,
endeavoring to visit the pond again, I was stopped by a guard, and
told that some tents just pitched by the shore contained the small-pox
patients, whom no one was allowed to approach within one hundred
yards. After they had recovered or died, the tents were set on fire as
they stood.

_Wednesday, 15th._--To-day, I followed Dr. Hay's trail all day, bent
on a personal interview, until I earthed him at last in his office;
and the result is that we are off for Richmond to-morrow. [I had seen
the Richmond paper with the official list of Yankees paroled from the
Libby, among whom were several whom I knew to be Pope's officers; and
I determined not to rot another day, as food for Confederate vermin,
without claiming my rights as prisoner of war. So when, after repeated
rebuffs, my obstinacy prevailed and Hay gave orders to let me in, he
wasn't in a good humor. But I told him, I forget in what terms, that I
had discovered that I was no longer a hostage liable to be hanged in
retaliation for the execution of guerrillas, but a prisoner of war,
with all that that implied, and that, in behalf of all who were able
to travel, I demanded to be sent to the Libby. He said we were better
off where we were. I agreed, but told him I would suffer anything to
know that my name was on the list to be paroled when my turn came, and
that it was my right to have it there. Finally he said, "Will you be
ready to start before light to-morrow?" "Let me go back for my
blanket," said I, "and I'll start now." "Well," said he, "go back, and
tell all who the ward surgeon says are able, to be ready by half-past
four." I saluted, faced about, and was in the doorway when he stopped
me and, seeming to recover his temper, asked me and any of my friends
who could to come over to his office after supper and take a farewell
drink.] In the evening [the journal resumes], we attended in Dr. Hay's
office, to take a social drink. Hay talked fire and fury, "secesh"
running up as the whiskey ran down. A lawyer and colonel joined in,
and the telegram of the Governor of North Carolina to the Governor of
South Carolina was so often quoted that I was fain to back down from
what was fast becoming a three-minute crowd. We had an amputation to
diversify the spree,--soldier brought in, who I suspect had applied
for a discharge by shooting off two fingers of his right hand. They
were badly mangled, so Hay put him down on the floor and took them off
again, short metre, not without cutting his own in the operation, he
was so tight. I came away then, fearing that my crutches might not be
as whiskey-proof as erst was wooden leg of Sawin, and the descent of
the front steps requiring that eye, hand, and foot (literally, foot)
should keep true time. There wasn't much sleep in No. 7 that night,
and early next morning we were off, leaving George and the skeleton
sergeant, who is fast going down to the dead, though he doesn't know
it. We had an awful trip, being detained six hours by a smash-up of
the night before, killing seven and wounding seventy-five,--a mere
skirmish. Shortly before we arrived, at about 1 A.M., an officer came
through the car, caught sight of my shoulder-straps, stopped: "You are
a captain?" "Yes." "Have you got any federal greenbacks?" "Yes, a
few." "Well, I want some to pay a debt I owe at the North, and I'll
give you Confederate money for them. You'll want some, for you'll
probably lie for months in the Libby, and you'll die if you don't send
out and buy good food." Said I, "Thank you, I guess I'll hold on to my
greenbacks till I get there."

The fact that nearly all the hospital officials had made the same
request on various pretexts was significant enough to me. At 2 A.M.,
we arrived, where I now write, in the Libby prison, being received
with the once familiar cry of "Corporal of the Guard, Post No. 1." The
corporal came and let us in. The officer, cross and sleepy (the
infernal traitor, Peacock, by the way), sent us to the hospital
department, up three flights,--immense room in large tobacco
warehouse, lighted with a single dip, which only made darkness
visible. A ragged young nurse, with his hair on end, welcomed us to
the scene of despair. We were put on cots of sacking, with nothing
under or over us, and shivered ourselves into oblivion. The next
morning, the familiar notes of reveille on the fife, accompanied by
the bass and snare-drum of the side-show, which Andrews used to detest
so, brought us again to consciousness. I was about to put my head out
of the window, but was forcibly informed that I'd better not, unless I
wanted it shot off. This day, a party went off which we had hoped to
join, but were disappointed; and a squad of sixty odd came in from
Macon, Georgia. I thought that I had seen filth, squalor, and
wretchedness before, but I never even conceived the meaning of the
words; and what these men had been through would have been incredible,
except to those who saw them. They said the Libby was heaven, in
comparison to what they had come from. Saw a dress-parade of the
regiment on duty here, which would have shamed the cadets for
measliness of turnout.

_Saturday._--In hell, _alias_ the Libby prison.

_Sunday._--This morning before breakfast, little spitfire clerk came
up to take our paroles. I could have embraced the little devil, but I
didn't, only waited till my name was called, when I toed the mark
_instanter_, and quite won his heart with the promptitude with which I
recited my descriptive list, insomuch that he asked me to take a
letter to his sweetheart. After this, the wretched crew were packed
into coaches and wagons, under command of the black-hearted traitor
Captain Peacock, and we left Libby, the sergeant and I being in with
two half-dead wretches of the Macon crowd, swarming with vermin.

But after a miserable jolt of fifteen miles, our nigger driver pointed
out the boat lying in a distant bend. "And dar de flag," said he with
a grin, "ober de starn," indicating a small red streak, which was "the
star-spangled banner, Oh, long may it wa-a-ve," etc. I confess to
embracing the staff when I got aboard, and realized that Jeff. Davis
himself couldn't take me away without a fight. But before they let us
go aboard there was a long and to us incomprehensible delay of nearly
two hours, during which we lay on the grass just above the landing and
watched the boat, the flag, and the blue uniforms, with longing eyes.
[We learned afterward that Captain Peacock, while strutting up and
down the wharf in full Confederate uniform, had been recognized by one
of the deck hands who had belonged to his former New York regiment.
The said deck hand pointed him out to a friend, with the remark,
"Look at his forehead, and you'll see traitor written there." This
being overheard by Mr. Peacock, he demanded an apology for the insult,
swearing that, if refused, he would march us all back to the Libby.
How they pacified him I don't know, but at the end of two hours he had
cooled off enough to let us go aboard. I was the first who received
permission to go, whereat I bounced on to my one foot and two
crutches, picked up my blanket, and charged down the hill. The rebel
sentry, who hadn't yet got his orders to pass us, charged bayonets on
me for an instant, but, on a sign from Peacock, shouldered arms again;
and the next moment I was embracing the flag-staff, as afore
mentioned. The Sanitary Commission received us with open arms and some
delicious milk-punch, and in a few minutes we were under full steam
out of rebeldom, Sergeant Holloway and I leaning on the guards,
watching the foam fly past, and singing, _sotto voce_,--"We're going
home, we're going home, we're going home to die no more!"

We were two days on board the flag-of-truce boat. The next cot to mine
was occupied by a man of a Massachusetts regiment, taken at the first
Bull Run. He was almost a skeleton, and the worst case of chills and
fever I ever saw. The second day being a shake day, he couldn't eat
his rations, and offered them to me. He said he thought he was dying.
"But," said he, "I don't complain now I've got out of hell, and I
shall live long enough to get back into God's country and die there,
which is all I've been praying for for months."]

_Monday._--Aboard the "Commodore," off Fortress Monroe, waiting for
orders, which have just come, for Washington. And here we are at
Washington, waiting orders again. When I find myself once more a free
man in Willard's Hotel, I shall turn down the leaf of my experiences
as prisoner of war to the rebels.

Now for philosophy. Captain gone ashore, and fearful rumors pervade
the boat about Annapolis, New York, etc. Well, it can be but a day or
two, and we are out of rebeldom. I've kept well so-- ["Far" would have
been the next word, but marching orders intervened, and the next
entry, in big letters at the bottom of the page, reads] A FREE MAN AT
WILLARD'S!

And the first act of the free man aforesaid was to purchase some
underclothes at the furnishing store, which luckily had not closed for
the night, and to proceed therewith to the bath-room, where hot water
and soap speedily restored that self-respect which is so difficult to
retain after one is conscious of not being the only inhabitant of
one's garments. The next day, I drew my pay and replaced my ragged
blouse, bullet-pierced trowsers, and torn Confederate cap (given me on
the field to replace my broad-brimmed felt, which a Georgia gentleman
fancied), by the jauntiest uniform clothes I could find, after which I
sallied out on the avenue; and the first man I met was the captain of
the "Commodore," who at first insisted that I was mistaken, as he had
never seen me before in his life; and only my crutches and wounded
foot at last convinced him that I was the same man who had talked to
him about Harry Russell, the day before. The next day, it was just the
other way. Smart young officer rushes up: "Hallo, Captain Quincy!
thought it must be you. How are you?" "Well," said I, "I'm glad you
thought it was I; but whether it's you or not I'm sure I don't know,
for I should say I had never set eyes on you before." "What, you don't
know the man you identified yesterday?" And it turned out to be a
lieutenant of a Western regiment, and fellow-prisoner, all of whose
clothing in the Libby consisted of shirt, trowsers, and army blanket
pinned over his shoulders. Arriving in Washington, without a cent, I
had identified him at the pay department, while still in his blanket,
from which chrysalis the all-potent greenback had evoked as shiny a
blue-and-brass butterfly as any on the avenue.

This concludes my prison history. I was never again taken, though
coming pretty near it once or twice in Louisiana, where, as an officer
of colored troops, my experiences might have been much more severe
than those above recounted. If the story has interested former
comrades or assisted in drawing closer the link which binds together
the survivors of the old regiment, I can only rejoice that the
committee asked me to relate it to you.




Transcriber's Note

As much of this work is a direct extract from a diary, spelling,
grammar and omission of words are preserved as printed.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of History of the Second Massachusetts
Regiment of Infantry: A prisoner's diary, by Samuel M. Quincy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 2ND MASS. REG. PRISONER'S DIARY ***

***** This file should be named 34895.txt or 34895.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/8/9/34895/

Produced by Sam W. and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
